<!-- @@@page:manual@@@ -->
<!-- @@@title:Internationalization@@@ -->

Internationalization
====================

| Module | Namespace | Stability |
|:-------|:----------|:----------|
| `npm install giant-i18n` | `$i18n` | **Stable** |

Giant facilitates [Gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/)-compatible translations through its internationalization (i18n) module, with support for standards-compliant pluralization and substitutions.

Without any translations available, 'translatable' strings resolve to themselves regardless of the current locale.

```js
'Hello World'.toTranslatable() + "" // "Hello World"
```

Current locale
--------------

State of the current locale is stored in a `$i18n.LocaleEnvironmentDocument` entity, but it's usually being manipulated through the `$i18n.LocaleEnvironment` singleton.

To set the current locale:

```js
$i18n.LocaleEnvironment.create()
    .setCurrentLocale('de-DE'.toLocale());
```

or, using the more convenient form:

```js
'de-DE'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
```

Note that **setting the current locale does not mean that the locale is ready for use**, as translations might still have to be loaded.

### Readiness of current locale

The current locale should only be applied (to the UI, etc) when its ready flag is set to `true`, also signaled by the `$i18n.EVENT_CURRENT_LOCALE_READY` event triggered on the `LocalEnvironment` singleton.

```js
$i18n.LocaleEnvironment.create().subscribeTo(
    $i18n.EVENT_CURRENT_LOCALE_READY,
    function () {
        // current locale ready for use
    });
```

Alternatively, you may use the `$i18n.LocaleBound` trait to add the capability of listening to `EVENT_CURRENT_LOCALE_READY` to application classes.

```js
var LocaleBoundClass = $oop.Base.extend()
    .addTrait($i18n.LocaleBound)
    .addMethods({
        init: function () {
            $i18n.LocaleBound.init.call(this);
            this.bindToCurrentLocaleReady(
                'onCurrentLocaleReady');
        },

        onCurrentLocaleReady: function () {
            // current locale ready for use
        }
    });
```

In the example above we bind to the event in the constructor, but this is only for brevity. Binding / unbinding may be done at any time throughout the instance's life cycle, what's important is to **always unbind before discarding the instance**.

> When a locale is already marked ready, setting it as current will trigger `EVENT_CURRENT_LOCALE_READY` immediately.
>
> When the current locale is not yet ready, it's the application's responsibility to mark it ready when appropriate.

Loading translations
--------------------

Giant's i18n module is agnostic about how translation data reaches the browser. The module offers however the means of storing translation data in the [entity store](entities.md#entity-storage), and to notify the rest of the application when loading has finished and a particular locale has become ready for use.

Once you have translations loaded (either via network or from file system) as key-value pairs, `LocaleDocument`, a document entity class designed specifically to manage locale data, will store the translations in the structure `giant-i18n` expects it:

```js
'locale/de-DE'.toDocument()
    .setTranslations({
        "Hello World": "Hallo Welt"
    });
```

After translations are set for a locale, the application is expected to mark it as ready:

```js
'de-DE'.toLocale().markAsReady()
```

Re-running the first example will now yield the expected result:

```js
'de-DE'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
'Hello World'.toTranslatable() + "" // "Hallo Welt"
```

### Initiating loading

One of Giant's central philosophies is to make everything work on-demand. Whenever the application attempts - and fails - to read from the `translations` field of a `locale` document, that signals the absence of a required locale. By listening to an `$entity.EVENT_ENTITY_ACCESS` event in the entity store we'll know that a locale is being accessed but is not there - and hence needs to be loaded.

```js
function onLocaleAccess(event) {
    var affectedKey = event.sender,
        localeKey = affectedKey.isA($entity.DocumentKey) ?
            affectedKey :
            affectedKey.documentKey;

    if (!localeKey.toDocument()
        .getField('translations')
        .getSilentNode()
    ) {
        // translations missing - start loading
    }
}

$entity.entityEventSpace
    .subscribeTo(
        $entity.EVENT_ENTITY_CHANGE,
        'entity>document>locale'.toPath(),
        onLocaleAccess);
```

When translations finished loading, make sure to mark it as ready as above.

Substitutions
-------------

A localized string will most likely contain substitutions - with values of either other localized strings, or field / item entities. Substitutions like that are handled by Giant's [templating](templating.md) module.

```js
// building string
var template = "You have {{what}}".toTranslatable()
    .toLiveTemplate()
    .setParameterValues({
        '{{what}}': "{{kind}} apples".toTranslatable(),
        '{{kind}}': "red".toTranslatable()
    });

'en-US'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
template + "" // "You have red apples"

// setting translations
'locale/de-DE'.toDocument()
    .setTranslations({
        "You have {{what}}": "Du hast {{what}}",
        "{{kind}} apples": "{{kind}} Äpfel",
        "red": "rote"
    });

'de-DE'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
template + "" // "Du hast rote Äpfel"
```

As the example shows, `Translatable` instances may be converted to `LiveTemplate` instances. From then on, the template behaves exactly the same way as a regular live template, except that the template 'string', as well as the parameter values are really `Stringifiable` instances.

Pluralization
-------------

What lies at the heart of any good translation mechanism is handling plural forms correctly. Giant i18n follows Gettext in this regard, with the ability to import its plural formulas and translations in JSON format. For more information about pluralization in Gettext, visit [http://localization-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/l10n/pluralforms.html](http://localization-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/l10n/pluralforms.html)

The pluralization formula is set on the locale document, similarly to translations:

```js
'locale/de-DE'.toDocument()
    .setPluralFormula('nplurals=2; plural=(n != 1);');
```

The formula we set here is the most common one, used in English, German, and many other languages. It has two forms, one for singular, and one for everything else. In certain languages, such as Polish, there are more than 2 forms.

In the formula, `nplurals` defines the number of forms, and `plural` is a function that associates multiplicity `n` with an array index specifying which value to take from a list of strings. (See example below.) The `plural` function is allowed to return boolean, where false evaluates to 0, true to 1.

Plural formulas are validated before application, and attempting to set an invalid plural formula will throw an exception.

Once the plural formula is set, we must ensure that translations come with the different forms:

```js
'locale/en-US'.toDocument()
    .setTranslations({
        "apple": ["apple", "apples"]
    });

'locale/de-DE'.toDocument()
    .setTranslations({
        "apple": ["Apfel", "Äpfel"]
    });
```

Now if we specify multiplicity for translatables, Giant will pick the corresponding form.

```js
var translatable = 'apple'.toTranslatable();

'de-DE'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
translatable.setMultiplicity(1) + "" // "Apfel"
translatable.setMultiplicity(999) + "" // "Äpfel"

'en-US'.toLocale().setAsCurrentLocale();
translatable.setMultiplicity(1) + "" // "apple"
translatable.setMultiplicity(999) + "" // "apples"
```

Gettext
-------

To complete the circle, we need to look at our options re. the extraction and processing of localization-affected strings in our application. Giant follows the conventions laid out by Gettext for a reason: it is the most ubiquitous open source tool for exporting marked strings to .POT files.

There are tools available facilitating the extraction, editing, and conversion of localized strings. The following list is a very brief outlook on some of the more popular ones.

- [grunt-xgettext](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-xgettext) is a simple Grunt plugin for string *extraction*. By default, it expects the translation function to be a global `tr()` function. The function name is configurable, but wrapping `.toTranslatable()` is advisable.
- Free or freemium *localization* products, such as [Poedit](https://poedit.net/) offer a convenient way to prepare translations in PO files.
- [grunt-po2json](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-po2json) is a Grunt plugin for *converting PO files to JSON*, ready to be loaded into a `LocaleDocument`'s `translations` collection.
